---
title: 'Week 7: Curriculum Development and Student Surveys'
categories: weeklies
---
Last week was quiet due to the July 1 Canada Day statutory holiday and the institute closure on the morning of July 5 because of the Stampede Parade. Despite the short week, I did manage to progress a few things.

Firstly, we defined and are planning to pilot a new workflow for requesting and implementing changes to curriculum in our school. The new workflow will do a better job of communicating proposed curriculum changes to the appropriate stakeholders in the school. Each program has a Program Specialist and dozens of Course Leads, in addition to the Academic Chair. Each party needs to be involved in any significant change made to curriculum or course outcomes. Courses feed each other as knowledge is progress from first year courses to second year courses. A change to a first year course runs the risk of not preparing students adequately for a second year course. Or a change to a second year course may result in students not gaining the necessary introductory knowledge from a first year course. The new workflow will spur better communication between everyone involved and prevent curriculum changes from being made without appropriate modifications to courses upstream or downstream.

Secondly, I was involved in a working group with members from [Macphail School of Energy](https://www.sait.ca/about-sait/who-we-are/sait-schools/macphail-school-of-energy) and [School of Construction](https://www.sait.ca/about-sait/who-we-are/sait-schools/school-of-construction) to propose improvements to the new Student Feedback Surveys (SFS) that SAIT is applying in the fall. In an effort to improve completion rates and standardize collection of student feedback across the whole institute, the new surveys ask students to answer approximately 20 questions about their course, instructors, learning resources, and to provide personal reflection.

Most courses delivered at SAIT follow traditional in-class lecture and applied laboratory models. However, there is a growing number of non-traditional courses, such as the co-operative education, practicum, and industry-sponsored capstones. The questions being asked in the SFS are not as appropriate for these work-integrated learning courses.

Our working group made a few suggestions. One was to include a question about the quality of the relationship between the student team and the industry partner/employer. If the partner is not meeting the agreed expectations, then the student(s) working with that partner are likely to not have a positive experience. We also suggested not asking the student how challenging the course was (as capstones _should_ be the most challenging course for a student) and instead inquire about whether the course used the majority of the knowledge that they student acquired in the program. SAIT strives to teach skills needed for employment, so if some skills are not being used within a work-integrated learning course, some adjustments are required.

Overall I feel bullish about the new survey tool and questions. Administrators such as myself will receive the results more quickly, meaning we can use the data when making important decisions about the subsequent semester. Students will no doubt appreciate the smaller number of questions and the new focus on personal reflection. As a result of these changes, I expect SAIT will receive a higher volume of better quality data that can be used to further improve our programs.
