---
title: 'Monthly report: June 2020'
month: Jun '20
layout: monthly-performance
---

For most of June, I had full expectations of having a very strong month. Out of the five trades that I closed this month, four of them resulted in gains. Total net profit from those four trades was USD $593.45.

Unfortunately, due to some errors or miscalculations in my tracking database, my XLB jade lizard resulted in a major loss. Analyzing the trade, I discovered that I opened the strategy back in February, just before the market meltdown due to coronavirus. The market swung pretty wild and the adjustments I made eventually went in-the-money, requiring further defensive moves. Some of the rolls I made to defend the position were not ideal (such as buying back an option for $18 then selling is for $16, incurring a $2 debit). In hindsight, this was the peak of market panic. I was worried that the markets would collapse and recovery would require significant time. I expect many other traders experienced similar feelings.

Looking at the overall monthly outcome, the results were actually pretty neutral. I ended up slightly positive before fees and lost less than $100 net. So overall, I'll declare the month to be a scratch and move on. My lesson from this month is to improve the calculations and formulas in my tracking database and to never blindly-trust the data. Before making any trade based on the information in the database, I will do a quick mental check to validate that the results are accurate.

I deposited $5,500 to the portfolio from my wife who asked me to 'make her some money'.

## Trades closed this month

| Symbol | Strategy       | Gross P/L ($USD) | Fees ($USD) | Net P/L ($USD) |
| ------ | -------------- | ----------------:| -----------:| --------------:|
| GDXJ   | Short strangle |           290.00 |       20.85 |         269.15 |
| XLB    | Jade lizard    |          -641.00 |       40.98 |        -681.98 |
| XBI    | Short put      |           133.00 |       11.40 |         121.60 |
| GDX    | Short straddle |           107.00 |       12.90 |          94.10 |
| GILD   | Short put      |           120.00 |       11.40 |         108.60 |
|        |                |         **9.00** |   **97.53** |     **-88.53** |
